Post about the new pattern matching compiler (#196)
ethereum/solidity-website: src/posts/2026-04-16-pattern-matching-in-core-solidity.md

---
layout: post
published: true
title: "Pattern Matching in Core Solidity"
date: "2026-xx-xx"
author: Solidity Team
category: Announcements
---

As we described in our
[Core Solidity deep dive](https://soliditylang.org/blog/2025/11/14/core-solidity-deep-dive/),
Core Solidity introduces algebraic data types (ADTs) and pattern matching as
first-class language features. This post explains why these features matter for
smart contract safety — not just as language niceties, but as a way to eliminate
an entire class of bugs at compile time that today costs real money to find and

> fix.

Reviewer: It would be better to lead with something a bit more "catching" rather than referencing a previous blog post. Maybe something like:

>  Smart contracts often need to handle values that come in several variants: a payment might be native ETH, an ERC20 transfer, or an NFT transfer; an auction can be not-started, active, ended, or cancelled. Each variant needs different handling, and the logic for that handling tends to be scattered across many functions. When a developer adds a new variant and forgets to update one of those functions, the compiler says nothing. Once deployed, that oversight can cost real money to find and fix.
>
> Core Solidity's algebraic data types (ADTs) and pattern matching, introduced in our [deep dive post](https://soliditylang.org/blog/2025/11/14/core-solidity-deep-dive/), eliminate this class of bug at compile time. This post explains why that matters for contract safety and how the feature holds up in practice.

Author: Fixed.

> fix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
first-class language features. This post explains why these features matter for
smart contract safety, and how they eliminate
an entire class of bugs at compile time that today costs real money to find and
fix.
```

            require(payment.token != address(0), "ERC20: token required");
            require(payment.amount > 0, "ERC20: amount required");
            require(payment.tokenId == 0, "ERC20: no tokenId");
            IERC20(payment.token).transferFrom(payment.from, payment.to, payment.amount);
        } else if (payment.paymentType == PaymentType.ERC721) {
            require(payment.token != address(0), "ERC721: token required");
            require(payment.amount == 1, "ERC721: amount must be 1");
            require(payment.tokenId > 0, "ERC721: tokenId required");
            IERC721(payment.token).transferFrom(payment.from, payment.to, payment.tokenId);
        }
    }

    function calculateFee(Payment calldata payment) external pure returns (uint256) {
        if (payment.paymentType == PaymentType.NATIVE) {
            return payment.amount / 20;
        } else if (payment.paymentType == PaymentType.ERC20) {
            return payment.amount / 10;
        } else if (payment.paymentType == PaymentType.ERC721) {
            return 0.01 ether;
        }
        return 0; // unreachable, but the compiler requires it
    }
}
```

> This code has several safety problems that the language cannot help us with.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This code has several safety problems that the language cannot catch.
```

**Invalid states are representable.** The `Payment` struct can be constructed
with contradictory fields: a `NATIVE` payment with a non-zero `token` address,
or an `ERC721` payment with no `tokenId`. The struct has enough fields to
represent any of the three payment variants, but nothing in the type prevents us
from filling those fields with incoherent values. The `require` calls in
`processPayment` are our only defense, and they have to be repeated in every
function that receives a `Payment`.

**No compile-time totality guarantee.** If we add a new variant, say `ERC1155`,
to the `PaymentType` enum, the compiler will not tell us where the dispatch
logic needs to be updated. `processPayment` will silently do nothing for
`ERC1155` payments. `calculateFee` will silently return 0. Every function that

> dispatches on `PaymentType` is a potential silent failure waiting to happen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dispatches on `PaymentType` can silently fail.
```

payment holds a recipient and an amount. An `ERC20` payment holds a token
contract address, a sender, a recipient, and an amount. An `ERC721` payment
holds a token contract, a sender, a recipient, and a token identifier. There is
no `Payment` value that carries an `ERC721` token identifier while claiming to
be a `Native` payment: the type simply does not allow it.

Now the `processPayment` function becomes declarative and self-documenting:

```js
function processPayment(payment : Payment) {
    match payment {
    | Native(to, amount) =>
        transfer(to, amount);
    | ERC20(token, from, to, amount) =>
        transferFromERC20(token, from, to, amount);
    | ERC721(token, from, to, tokenId) =>
        transferFromERC721(token, from, to, tokenId);
    }
}
```

The pattern match binds exactly the fields that are relevant to each variant.
There are no `require` calls to check structural invariants, the type system has
already done that job. The `amount` field on a `Native` payment and the
`tokenId` field on an `ERC721` payment cannot be confused, because they live in
separate constructors.

Adding a new variant, say `ERC1155(address, address, address, tokenid, word)`,

> will cause the compiler to immediately report every match expression that does

Reviewer: Here we use the term `match expression`, but on line [246](https://github.com/argotorg/solidity-website/pull/196/changes#diff-c5f8b77050087a8a123d7c626f5c2a62f64577358bf06f6dcaf866a8052cb87fR246) we use `match statement`. Let's be consistent. Or is there a subtle difference I'm not aware of?

Author: It is wrong. The correct is match statement. Fixed.

not handle the new case. No function can silently miss the new variant.

## Totality: Exhaustiveness as a Safety Property

The example above hints at the most important safety property that pattern
matching brings to smart contracts: **exhaustiveness checking**, also called
totality. A pattern match is exhaustive if every possible value of the scrutinee

> (the value being matched on) type is handled by at least one branch. The Core

Reviewer: ```suggestion
type (the value being matched on) is handled by at least one branch. The Core
```

Reads better like this. Letting "scrutinee type" stand alone and not be split in the middle.

Solidity compiler enforces this statically and rejects any program that contains
an incomplete match.

> Why does this matter so much for smart contracts in particular? Smart contract

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Smart contract
```

I'd remove the rhetorical question. Doesn't add much value.

and `Cancelled`, or add a wildcard default (`| _ =>`), but in either case the
decision is deliberate and visible in the source code.

Redundancy checking is the complementary property: the compiler also warns when
a pattern branch can never be reached because an earlier branch already covers
its inputs. Redundant branches are often symptoms of copy-paste errors or of
code that was not updated after a refactor.

### What This Means for Audits

Smart contract security audits are expensive. A significant portion of audit
time on enum-heavy contracts goes toward verifying that every function that
dispatches on a type covers all cases — manually tracing if-else chains and
checking that no variant falls through to a silent default. This is tedious,
error-prone work that scales with the number of functions and variants in a
codebase.

Pattern matching with exhaustiveness checking makes that entire category of
audit finding disappear. When the compiler rejects incomplete matches, an
auditor does not need to check whether `calculateFee` handles `ERC1155` — if it
compiled, it does. The time auditors previously spent tracing dispatch logic can

> be spent on higher-value findings. For projects paying $50,000–$500,000 for an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be spent on higher-value findings. For projects paying five or six figures for an
```

> audit, that is a concrete, measurable saving.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
audit, that is a real saving.
```

### What About Existing Validation Patterns?

A reasonable question from developers who already write defensive code: "I
already use `require` checks and careful enum handling. What does this buy me?"

The answer is not that your current practices are wrong — it is that they do not

> scale. Today, the discipline of "update every dispatch function when you add a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your existing practices aren't wrong, they just don't scale.
Today, the discipline of "update every dispatch function when you add a
```

> variant" lives in your head, in code review checklists, and in audit reports. It

Reviewer: ```suggestion
variant" relies on memory, code review checklists, and audit reports. It
```

is not enforced by the compiler, so it can fail. When a team member adds
`ERC1155` support under deadline pressure and misses one function, the compiler
says nothing. Pattern matching moves that discipline into the toolchain, where
it cannot be forgotten.

## The Pattern Match Compiler

Exhaustiveness and redundancy checking, together with the translation of nested
patterns into efficient code, are handled by a dedicated compilation pass in the

> Core Solidity prototype and it follows the ideas described in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
patterns into efficient code, are handled by a dedicated compilation pass in the
Core Solidity prototype, which follows the ideas described in
```

[Compiling Pattern Matching to Good Decision Trees](http://moscova.inria.fr/~maranget/papers/ml05e-maranget.pdf).

This pass runs after type inference and before code generation. Its job is to
transform `match` expressions over arbitrary nested patterns into a _decision
tree_ — a form where each node tests exactly one scrutinee against flat

> constructor patterns, with no nesting. The resulting tree is then converted back

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tree_, a form where each node tests exactly one scrutinee against flat
constructor patterns. The resulting tree is then converted back
```

nit: "with no nesting" seems redundant after you already say it's "flat"

### Exhaustiveness and Redundancy Errors

The compiler produces concrete, actionable error messages. An incomplete match:

```js
function discount(state : AuctionState, phase : Phase) -> uint256 {
    match state, phase {
    | Active(bid, _), Early => return bid / 10;
    | Active(bid, _), Late  => return bid / 20;
    // missing: all non-Active states
    }
}
```

produces:

```
Non-exhaustive pattern match. Missing case: NotStarted($v0), $v1
  in function discount
  in match (state, phase)
```

The witness `NotStarted($v0), $v1` identifies the first uncovered case: any
`NotStarted` state paired with any phase value, giving the developer a concrete
starting point for completing the match.

A redundant arm:

```js
function f(x : Bool) -> Bool {
    match x {
    | z    => return z;    // catches everything
    | True => return True; // unreachable: z above already covers True
    }
}
```

produces:

```
Warning: Clause (True → return True) is redundant.
  in function f
  in match (x)
```

Unlike non-exhaustive matches, redundant-clause warnings do not prevent
compilation: they are surfaced as warnings to assist developers during
refactoring.

> ## Lowering to Yul — and Why There Is No Overhead

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Lowering to Yul (and Why There Is No Overhead)
```

This one is very much a nit. Em-dashes are looked upon weirdly in this AI age and most people think it's a tell that AI wrote things. I do like em-dashes though, so I'm fine with leaving the title as is.

```yul
function usr$tryWithdraw(balance, amount) -> _result_tag, _result_payload {
  let cond
  cond := iszero(lt(balance, amount))    // balance >= amount
  switch cond
    case false {
      _result_tag := false
      leave
    }
    case true {
      _result_tag     := true
      _result_payload := sub(balance, amount)
      leave
    }
}
```

For `isFinished`, an N-ary sum with four constructors:

```js
function isFinished(state : AuctionState) -> Bool {
    match state {
    | NotStarted(_)    => return False;
    | Active(_, _)     => return False;
    | Ended(_, _)      => return True;
    | Cancelled(_, _)  => return True;
    }
}
```

```yul
function usr$isFinished(state_tag, state_f0, state_f1) -> _result {
  switch state_tag
    case 0 { _result := false; leave }   // NotStarted
    case 1 { _result := false; leave }   // Active
    case 2 { _result := true;  leave }   // Ended
    case 3 { _result := true;  leave }   // Cancelled
}
```

This is the same code you would write by hand if you were implementing a tagged
union in Yul directly. The new language / compiler machinery: the ADT
definition, the exhaustiveness check, the pattern matrix compilation contributes

> adds zero instructions to the final bytecode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
union in Yul directly. This machinery, the ADT definition,
the exhaustiveness check, the pattern matrix compilation,
adds zero instructions to the final bytecode.
```

## Conclusion

Core Solidity's algebraic data types and pattern matching address a class of
smart contract bugs that Classic Solidity has no good defense against: the
silent handling of missing or newly-added cases.

The problems are structural. When a contract's logic depends on a set of
alternatives - payment types, auction phases, token standards, vote outcomes -
Classic Solidity provides enums and structs, but it cannot enforce that every
function that dispatches on that type handles all cases, or that every variant
carries the right fields and no others. Developers fill the gap with runtime

> `require` checks and a discipline of adding cases everywhere. That discipline is

Reviewer: nit: it seems that this section is using hyphens (`-`) instead of em-dashes (`—`).
It's a small detail, but it caught my eye when looking at rendered blogpost.

            require(payment.tokenId > 0, "ERC721: tokenId required");
            IERC721(payment.token).transferFrom(payment.from, payment.to, payment.tokenId);
        }
    }

    function calculateFee(Payment calldata payment) external pure returns (uint256) {
        if (payment.paymentType == PaymentType.NATIVE) {
            return payment.amount / 20;
        } else if (payment.paymentType == PaymentType.ERC20) {
            return payment.amount / 10;
        } else if (payment.paymentType == PaymentType.ERC721) {
            return 0.01 ether;
        }
        return 0; // unreachable, but the compiler requires it
    }
}
```

This code has several safety problems that the language cannot help us with.

**Invalid states are representable.** The `Payment` struct can be constructed
with contradictory fields: a `NATIVE` payment with a non-zero `token` address,
or an `ERC721` payment with no `tokenId`. The struct has enough fields to
represent any of the three payment variants, but nothing in the type prevents us
from filling those fields with incoherent values. The `require` calls in
`processPayment` are our only defense, and they have to be repeated in every

> function that receives a `Payment`.

Reviewer 2: I'd highlight also that they cost gas, unlike type-system-level checks. The compiler description goes in depth about the low overhead of the abstraction but I don't see it mentioned in the part about benefits.

Author: Added text to explain the gas cost.

## Totality: Exhaustiveness as a Safety Property

The example above hints at the most important safety property that pattern
matching brings to smart contracts: **exhaustiveness checking**, also called
totality. A pattern match is exhaustive if every possible value of the scrutinee
type (the value being matched on) is handled by at least one branch. The Core
Solidity compiler enforces this statically and rejects any program that contains
an incomplete match.

Why does this matter so much for smart contracts in particular? Smart contract
bugs are extremely costly to fix. Once a contract is deployed, its logic is
immutable (absent an upgradeable proxy pattern), and any ether or tokens locked
by a buggy contract may be permanently inaccessible. In the Classic Solidity
`calculateFee` function above, the final `return 0` is dead code that exists
only because the compiler cannot verify that the if-else chain covers all
variants. If a future developer adds a fourth `PaymentType` and forgets to
update `calculateFee`, the function silently returns zero — a potentially
expensive mistake that will not be caught until it is too late.

> Exhaustiveness checking transforms this category of bug into a compile-time

Reviewer 2: Is `category of bug`/`class of bug` grammatical? It sounds less natural to me than `category of bugs`/`class of bugs`, though I'm not certain if it's because it's incorrect or just uncommon.

Author: Fixed. Replaced by category of bugs.

patterns into efficient code, are handled by a dedicated compilation pass in the
Core Solidity prototype, which follows the ideas described in
[Compiling Pattern Matching to Good Decision Trees](http://moscova.inria.fr/~maranget/papers/ml05e-maranget.pdf).

This pass runs after type inference and before code generation. Its job is to
transform `match` statements over arbitrary nested patterns into a _decision
tree_ — a form where each node tests exactly one scrutinee against flat
constructor patterns, with no nesting. The resulting tree is then converted back
into simplified `match` statements that the Yul backend can handle directly.

The algorithm works by treating the match arms as a _pattern matrix_ (one row
per arm, one column per scrutinee), selecting the most informative column to
test first using a necessity heuristic, and recursively building sub-matrices
for each constructor case. Exhaustiveness and redundancy are both detected as
natural byproducts of this construction: a missing case surfaces when the matrix
has no row to cover a particular input, and a redundant arm surfaces when its
row is already subsumed by earlier rows.

> The practical output of this pass is straightforward. The `discount` function:

Reviewer 2: This sounds as if I should already be familiar with the `discount` function. Would be better to introduce it as an example. E.g.:

```suggestion
The practical output of this pass is straightforward.
For example, let's take a look at the following function:
```

Reviewer 2: Or did you actually mean to reference something from a previous example? This function does look somewhat similar to `calculateFee()`.

Reviewer 2: Similar issue with `require()` and `not()` in the section about Yul. It reads as if you're referencing some well-known functions from stdlib. But then you get to `isFinished()` and `tryWithdraw()` which clearly can't be that.

introduced by the flattening has been substituted into the arm body.

### Exhaustiveness and Redundancy Errors

The compiler produces concrete, actionable error messages. An incomplete match:

```js
function discount(state : AuctionState, phase : Phase) -> uint256 {
    match state, phase {
    | Active(bid, _), Early => return bid / 10;
    | Active(bid, _), Late  => return bid / 20;
    // missing: all non-Active states
    }
}
```

produces:

```
Non-exhaustive pattern match. Missing case: NotStarted($v0), $v1
  in function discount
  in match (state, phase)
```

The witness `NotStarted($v0), $v1` identifies the first uncovered case: any
`NotStarted` state paired with any phase value, giving the developer a concrete
starting point for completing the match.

A redundant arm:

```js
function f(x : Bool) -> Bool {
    match x {
    | z    => return z;    // catches everything
    | True => return True; // unreachable: z above already covers True
    }
}
```

produces:

```
Warning: Clause (True → return True) is redundant.
  in function f
  in match (x)
```

Unlike non-exhaustive matches, redundant-clause warnings do not prevent

> compilation: they are surfaced as warnings to assist developers during

Reviewer 2: "surfaced" does not sound natural in this context.

```suggestion
compilation: they are reported as warnings to assist developers during
```

constructor. The output is minimal and readable.

For `not`, a nullary binary sum:

```js
function not(b : Bool) -> Bool {
    match b {
    | False => return True;
    | True  => return False;
    }
}
```

```yul
function usr$not(_v0) -> _result {
  switch _v0
    case false { _result := true;  leave }
    case true  { _result := false; leave }
}
```

For `require`, a match arm with an empty body:

```js
function require(cond : Bool, msg : word) {
    match cond {
    | True  =>
    | False => myrevert(msg);
    }
}
```

```yul
function usr$require(cond, msg) {
  switch cond
    case true  {}
    case false { usr$myrevert(msg) }
}
```

Empty `{}` blocks are valid Yul. The `case true` arm does nothing and falls
through to the implicit `leave`.

For `tryWithdraw`, a binary sum with a payload (`Option(uint256)`):

```js
data Option(a) = None | Some(a);

function tryWithdraw(balance : uint256, amount : uint256) -> Option(uint256) {
    match balance >= amount {
    | False => return None;
    | True  => return Some(balance - amount);
    }
}
```

`None` is `(false, <unused>)` and `Some(x)` is `(true, x)` — two stack slots.

> The function returns both:

Reviewer 2: I think this would be clearer without the `Option`. It seems to me that the point is to show how more complex conditions are compiled and the enum distracts from that. At first I actually missed it and thought the enum was the point.

Or, if you do want to specifically show what ADTs compile into, I'd put that in a separate example (without a `match`, which is not relevant to that).

Author: I do not get your point here. The example makes sense for me.

Reviewer 2: Maybe you're right. My point was the `Option` is distracting because it seems like it's relevant to the example while it's not. You could just as well reduce it to something like this:

```js
function withdrawableAmount(balance : uint256, amount : uint256) -> uint256 {
    match balance >= amount {
    | False => return 0;
    | True  => return balance - amount;
    }
}
```

Though I also expected that this would somewhat reduce the generated assembly, but looking at it now, the part generated by `Option` is not that complex:

```yul
      _result_tag     := true
      _result_payload := sub(balance, amount)
```
so it does not improve as much as I thought.

Author: Fixed.

  switch state_tag
    case 0 { _result := false; leave }   // NotStarted
    case 1 { _result := false; leave }   // Active
    case 2 { _result := true;  leave }   // Ended
    case 3 { _result := true;  leave }   // Cancelled
}
```

This is the same code you would write by hand if you were implementing a tagged
union in Yul directly. The new language / compiler machinery: the ADT
definition, the exhaustiveness check, the pattern matrix compilation contributes
adds zero instructions to the final bytecode.

## Conclusion

Core Solidity's algebraic data types and pattern matching address a class of
smart contract bugs that Classic Solidity has no good defense against: the
silent handling of missing or newly-added cases.

The problems are structural. When a contract's logic depends on a set of
alternatives - payment types, auction phases, token standards, vote outcomes -
Classic Solidity provides enums and structs, but it cannot enforce that every
function that dispatches on that type handles all cases, or that every variant
carries the right fields and no others. Developers fill the gap with runtime
`require` checks and a discipline of adding cases everywhere. That discipline is

> not enforced by the compiler, so it can and does fail - usually at the worst

Reviewer 2: Most of the text uses em dashes but this final section has ordinary ones. You should settle on one style.

BTW, the em dashes are a common telltale of LLM-produced text, which nowadays may inadvertently give people an impression of low quality. They are technically more correct, but I generally tend to avoid them.

Author: I'll rewrite all parts that use dashes into equivalent sentences.

Author: Rewritten into equivalent sentences.

```
Non-exhaustive pattern match. Missing case: Ended($v0, $v1)
  in function processBid
  in match (state)
```

The compiler names a concrete missing pattern, a _witness_, so the programmer
knows exactly what case has been overlooked. This error must be resolved before
the program can compile. The developer might add explicit branches for `Ended`
and `Cancelled`, or add a wildcard default (`| _ =>`), but in either case the
decision is deliberate and visible in the source code.

Redundancy checking is the complementary property: the compiler also warns when
a pattern branch can never be reached because an earlier branch already covers
its inputs. Redundant branches are often symptoms of copy-paste errors or of
code that was not updated after a refactor. Having the compiler detect them
avoids the subtle class of bugs where a developer believes they are modifying
one case of a dispatch but are actually modifying code that never executes.

## The Pattern Match Compiler

Exhaustiveness and redundancy checking, together with the translation of nested
patterns into efficient runtime dispatch, are handled by a dedicated compilation
pass in the Core Solidity prototype:

> [`DecisionTreeCompiler.hs`](https://github.com/argotorg/solcore/blob/main/src/Solcore/Desugarer/DecisionTreeCompiler.hs).

Reviewer 3: The jump into compiler internals seems a bit abrupt, some introduction might be helpful.

Reviewer: i agree. The first part of the blog post up until this point is more explanatory of "what pattern matching and ADT is" and from here on it's more focused on how it works. I am not sure if the audience for those two things are the same. 
We might not have to make to separate blogposts, but we should definitely mention here that the remainder of the post is diving deeper into how we've implemented it and isn't necessarily relevant if the reader only wanted to understand what it is.

tree_, a form where each node tests exactly one scrutinee against flat
constructor patterns, with no nesting. The resulting tree is then converted back
into a simplified `match` statement that later passes (specialization and Yul
emission) can handle directly.

### The Pattern Matrix

The compiler's input is a _pattern matrix_: one row per match arm, one column
per scrutinee expression, with the arm's body as its action. Consider this
function from the payment example:

```js
function processPayment(payment : Payment) {
    match payment {
    | Native(to, amount)           => transfer(to, amount);
    | ERC20(token, from, to, amt)  => transferFromERC20(token, from, to, amt);
    | ERC721(token, from, to, tid) => transferFromERC721(token, from, to, tid);
    }
}
```

The matrix here has three rows and one column:

```
Column 0 (payment)                  Action
---------------------------------------
Native(to, amount)           →  transfer(to, amount)
ERC20(token, from, to, amt)  →  transferFromERC20(...)
ERC721(token, from, to, tid) →  transferFromERC721(...)
```

Multi-scrutinee matches naturally produce multi-column matrices. This match

> function, which computes whether a state transition is permitted in an auction:

Reviewer 3: The description does not match the `discount` example, perhaps it's about `canFinalize`?

---
layout: post
published: true
title: "Pattern Matching in Core Solidity"

> date: "2026-xx-xx"

Reviewer: Should be updated to fix the release date, once we've settled on one. So far I changed the name of the .md file to have the date prefixed as it's required by the framework. Would be great to get the post out around that date. (16-04-2026)

Reviewer 2: I'd keep this one unresolved until the actual date is put in so that we don't forget about it.

author: Solidity Team
category: Announcements
---

As we described in our
[Core Solidity deep dive](https://soliditylang.org/blog/2025/11/14/core-solidity-deep-dive/),
Core Solidity introduces algebraic data types (ADTs) and pattern matching as
first-class language features. This post digs into why these features matter for
smart contract safety, and how the pattern matching compiler in the Core

> Solidity prototype is implemented.

Reviewer: The intro starts by referencing the previous post and then saying what this post will cover. That's a soft open and the reader doesn't have a reason to care yet. Consider leading with the punch: what problem does pattern matching solve? The safety argument ("silent bugs that `require` checks can't fully prevent") is the hook, but it doesn't show up until later in the post.

I am fine to do an iteration later to address some of these "softer" details in the post.

## Why Classic Solidity Needs Better Data Modeling

Smart contracts often deal with data that exists in one of several mutually
exclusive states. A natural example is a multi-asset payment processor that can
handle native ETH transfers, ERC20 token transfers, and ERC721 NFT transfers.

Here is a representative implementation in Classic Solidity:

```solidity
// SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
pragma solidity ^0.8.0;

contract PaymentHandler {
    enum PaymentType { NATIVE, ERC20, ERC721 }

    struct Payment {
        PaymentType paymentType;
        address token;
        address from;
        address to;
        uint256 amount;
        uint256 tokenId;
    }

    function processPayment(Payment calldata payment) external {
        if (payment.paymentType == PaymentType.NATIVE) {
            require(payment.token == address(0), "Native: no token");
            require(payment.amount > 0, "Native: amount required");
            require(payment.tokenId == 0, "Native: no tokenId");

>             payable(payment.to).call{value: payment.amount}("");

Reviewer: The return value of `.call{value: ...}("")` isn't checked here. Since the post is arguing for safety,this is a bit ironic. Consider either checking it `((bool success, ) = payable(...).call{...}(""); require(success);)` or adding a comment like `// (return value check omitted for brevity)`.

Author: Fixed.

Now the `processPayment` function becomes declarative and self-documenting:

```js
function processPayment(payment : Payment) {
    match payment {
    | Native(to, amount) =>
        transfer(to, amount);
    | ERC20(token, from, to, amount) =>
        transferFromERC20(token, from, to, amount);
    | ERC721(token, from, to, tokenId) =>
        transferFromERC721(token, from, to, tokenId);
    }
}
```

The pattern match binds exactly the fields that are relevant to each variant.
There are no `require` calls to check structural invariants, the type system has
already done that job. The `amount` field on a `Native` payment and the
`tokenId` field on an `ERC721` payment cannot be confused, because they live in
separate constructors.

Adding a new variant, say `ERC1155(address, address, address, tokenid, word)`,
will cause the compiler to immediately report every match expression that does
not handle the new case. No function can silently miss the new variant.

## Totality: Exhaustiveness as a Safety Property

The example above hints at the most important safety property that pattern
matching brings to smart contracts: **exhaustiveness checking**, also called

> totality. A pattern match is exhaustive if every possible value of the scrutinee

Reviewer: "Scrutinee" is used several times in the post but never defined. Most Solidity devs won't know this term. Consider defining it on first use here, e.g.: "...every possible value of the scrutinee (the expression being matched on) is handled by at least one branch." 
Alternatively, using a more layman's explanation like "every possible value of the matched expression is handled by at least one branch"

type is handled by at least one branch. The Core Solidity compiler enforces this
statically and rejects any program that contains an incomplete match.

Why does this matter so much for smart contracts in particular? Smart contract
bugs are extremely costly to fix. Once a contract is deployed, its logic is
immutable (absent an upgradeable proxy pattern), and any ether or tokens locked
by a buggy contract may be permanently inaccessible. In the Classic Solidity
`calculateFee` function above, the final `return 0` is dead code that exists
only because the compiler cannot verify that the if-else chain covers all
variants. If a future developer adds a fourth `PaymentType` and forgets to

> update `calculateFee`, the function silently returns zero, a potentially

Reviewer: ```suggestion
update `calculateFee`, the function silently returns zero. This is a potentially
```
this is a comma splice (two clauses joined by just a comma)

```

The compiler names a concrete missing pattern, a _witness_, so the programmer
knows exactly what case has been overlooked. This error must be resolved before
the program can compile. The developer might add explicit branches for `Ended`
and `Cancelled`, or add a wildcard default (`| _ =>`), but in either case the
decision is deliberate and visible in the source code.

Redundancy checking is the complementary property: the compiler also warns when
a pattern branch can never be reached because an earlier branch already covers
its inputs. Redundant branches are often symptoms of copy-paste errors or of
code that was not updated after a refactor. Having the compiler detect them
avoids the subtle class of bugs where a developer believes they are modifying
one case of a dispatch but are actually modifying code that never executes.

## The Pattern Match Compiler

Exhaustiveness and redundancy checking, together with the translation of nested
patterns into efficient code, are handled by a dedicated compilation pass in the
Core Solidity prototype:
[`DecisionTreeCompiler.hs`](https://github.com/argotorg/solcore/blob/main/src/Solcore/Desugarer/DecisionTreeCompiler.hs).

> The implementation follows the ideas described in paper

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The implementation follows the ideas described in the paper
```

[Compiling Pattern Matching to Good Decision Trees](http://moscova.inria.fr/~maranget/papers/ml05e-maranget.pdf).

This pass runs after type inference and before specialization. Its job is to
transform `match` expressions over arbitrary nested patterns into a _decision
tree_, a form where each node tests exactly one scrutinee against flat
constructor patterns, with no nesting. The resulting tree is then converted back
into a simplified `match` statement that later passes (specialization and Yul

> emission) can handle directly.

Reviewer 3: Might be worth mentioning *what* can be handled by Yul: simple numeric switches of the form

```
switch calldataload(4)
    case 0 {
        x := calldataload(0x24)
    }
    default {
        x := calldataload(0x44)
    }
```

> ### The Pattern Matrix

Reviewer 3: Before introducing the matrix, it might be worthwhile to mention why (or rather when) this is a nontrivial problem: matching on a single variable is easy, matching on multiple is not. 

If we split the post in two as Jakob suggests, it might be a good teaser for the second post: show a nontrivial (but perhaps not too big) example and challenge readers to translate it to nested simple matches, then discuss the solutions in the second post.

The compiler's input is a _pattern matrix_: one row per match arm, one column
per scrutinee expression, with the arm's body as its action. Consider this
function from the payment example:

```js
function processPayment(payment : Payment) {
    match payment {
    | Native(to, amount)           => transfer(to, amount);
    | ERC20(token, from, to, amt)  => transferFromERC20(token, from, to, amt);
    | ERC721(token, from, to, tid) => transferFromERC721(token, from, to, tid);
    }
}
```

The matrix here has three rows and one column:

```
Column 0 (payment)                  Action
---------------------------------------
Native(to, amount)           →  transfer(to, amount)
ERC20(token, from, to, amt)  →  transferFromERC20(...)
ERC721(token, from, to, tid) →  transferFromERC721(...)
```

Multi-scrutinee matches naturally produce multi-column matrices. This match
function, which computes whether a state transition is permitted in an auction:

```js

> data Phase = Early | Late

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
data Phase = Early | Late ;
```

Author: Fixed.

function discount(state : AuctionState, phase : Phase) -> uint256 {
    match state, phase {
    | Active(bid, _), Early => return bid / 10;
    | Active(bid, _), Late  => return bid / 20;
    | _, _                  => return 0;
    }
}
```

produces a 3×2 matrix:

```
Column 0 (state)      Column 1 (phase)    Action
-------------------------------------------------
Active(bid, _)        Early          →  return bid / 10
Active(bid, _)        Late           →  return bid / 20
$v0                   $v1            →  return 0
```

(Wildcards have been replaced with fresh variables `$v0`, `$v1` by an earlier
desugaring pass.)

### Column Selection

When the matrix has more than one column, the algorithm must decide which column
to test first. The compiler uses the _necessity heuristic_: it counts the number
of non-variable patterns in each column and selects the column with the highest
score. Columns with more constructor or literal patterns carry more information
and prune the matrix faster.

For the `discount` matrix above:

```
Column 0 (state) necessity: 2  (Active, Active — two non-variable patterns)
Column 1 (phase) necessity: 2  (Early, Late — two non-variable patterns)
```

> Both columns score equally. When scores tie the compiler prefers the shallowest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Both columns score equally. When scores tie, the compiler prefers the shallowest
```

scrutinee, the one that requires the fewest field accesses to reach from the
top-level value, so column 0 is selected first.

For a matrix that is more clearly asymmetric, consider:

```js
function canFinalize(state : AuctionState, approved : Bool) -> Bool {
    match state, approved {
    | Ended(_, _),    True  => return True;
    | Cancelled(_, _), True => return True;
    | _,              _     => return False;
    }
}
```

```
Column 0 (state)    Column 1 (approved)   Action
-------------------------------------------------
Ended(_, _)         True           →  return True
Cancelled(_, _)     True           →  return True
$v0                 $v1            →  return False
```

Here column 0 has necessity score 2, column 1 has score 1, so column 0 is
selected and the compiler emits a single `switch` on the auction state tag

> before ever looking at `approved`.

Reviewer: I don't understand how you get to column 1 having a score of 1. Can you explain how we arrive at that? Isn't (True, True, $v1) two non-variable patterns? 
Maybe I'm just not used enough to looking at this, but either way, being more explicit about how we arrive at the result would help readers understand

> 

Reviewer: the `canFinalize` example seems incomplete compared to the `discount` example, which had an explanation of the results.

Author: Removed.

### Lowering to Yul

After pattern compilation, the program goes through specialization
(monomorphization of generic functions and type class instances) and is emitted
as Hull: a first-order functional intermediate representation with sum and
product types. The separate `yule` binary, implemented in
[`Translate.hs`](https://github.com/argotorg/solcore/blob/main/yule/Translate.hs),
then translates Hull into Yul.

#### Runtime Representation of Sum Types

The central challenge for the Yul backend is that Yul has no algebraic types,
only 256-bit words and flat sequences of those words. Every sum type must
therefore be _flattened_ onto the EVM stack.

The compiler represents a sum type as a sequence of EVM stack slots whose length
is:

```
1 (tag) + max(size of each constructor's payload)
```

The tag is a single word that identifies which constructor is active (starting
at 0). The payload slots hold the fields of the active constructor, padded with
unused words to fill the maximum payload size across all constructors.

**Binary sums (`A | B`).** A type with two constructors is represented as a
single word: 0 (`false` in Yul) for the first constructor, 1 (`true` in Yul) for

> the second. Because both `unit` payload fields are zero-sized, no payload slot

Reviewer: Only mention of `unit`. Consider adding an explanation of what it is. Currently it sounds like something everyone knows what is, but I'm not sure that's the case.

Reviewer: Maybe even better yet is to just remove it, since it's only mentioned this once. Could a phrase like "Because
  neither False nor True carries any data, no payload slot is needed beyond the tag." be used instead?

Author: Removed.

is needed beyond the tag. So `Bool = False

> | True` occupies exactly one stack

Reviewer: Maybe not a problem, but having the inline code span two lines like this looks a bit weird and I don't know if all markdown renderers support it

**2 stack slots**: a tag word and a payload word. `None` is `(false, <unused>)`
and `Some(x)` is `(true, x)`.

The function `tryWithdraw` returns an `Option(uint256)`, so its Yul return
signature exposes two words:

```yul
function usr$tryWithdraw(balance, amount) -> _result_tag, _result_payload {
  let cond
  cond := iszero(lt(balance, amount))    // balance >= amount
  switch cond
    case false {
      // None: tag = false, payload slot unused
      _result_tag := false
      leave
    }
    case true {
      // Some(balance - amount): tag = true, payload = new balance
      _result_tag    := true
      _result_payload := sub(balance, amount)
      leave
    }
}
```

Callers of `tryWithdraw` receive both return words and can branch on
`_result_tag` to check whether the withdrawal succeeded before using
`_result_payload`.

#### N-ary Sums and the Compression Pass

Types with three or more constructors go through an additional transformation.
At the Core IR level, a multi-constructor type such as

```js
data AuctionState =
    NotStarted(uint256)
  | Active(uint256, address)
  | Ended(uint256, address)
  | Cancelled(uint256, address);
```

> is initially encoded as nested binary sums: `NotStarted` becomes `inl`, and the

Reviewer: I have no idea if `inl` is something I'm supposed to know what is or not. It came out of nowhere. 
Consider either briefly defining them ("inject left"/"inject right") or just describing the concept without the jargon: "NotStarted is tagged as the first alternative, and the remaining constructors are nested inside the second alternative."

Author: Removed.
